Add documentation on the internals of cache_log_message (#7)
squid-cache/squid-cache.github.io: docs/Features/CacheLogMessage.md

---
categories: Feature
---

> # Feature: Cache Log Message individual control

Reviewer: I am against using Feature format for developer-focused documentation. This page is not about the (already well-documented) Squid feature. It is about helping developers to enhance Squid in a particular way. This information will never be complete and will get stale, but it may still be useful. We should find a better/new/dedicated location (within this repository) for this kind of development advice, so that it is easier to find, and so that notes can share common disclaimers and caveats.

I (still) recommend adding Squid developer "notes" for that purpose and have even published a [few](https://github.com/measurement-factory/squid-notes/tree/start) to bootstrap that idea (long before this repository was created). If you like that idea, this PR can create something like `docs/dev-notes/cache_log_message.md`. We could reuse the old docs/ProgrammingGuide, but I do not recommend that (I can detail my reasoning if somebody thinks that reusing ProgrammingGuide is a great idea).

P.S. I do not recommend using the old Feature approach for new user-focused pages. It has been proven problematic, on several levels. We can agree to revamp that approach to address those known shortcomings (but that discussion is probably outside this PR scope).

- **Goal**: allow controlling each cache log message individually
- **Version**: 6.0
- **Developer**: Eduard Bagdasaryan

## Details

Enable controlling certain aspects of individual log messages via a squid.conf directive.
Details on the configuration directive are in the
[configuration manual](http://www.squid-cache.org/Doc/config/cache_log_message/)

Individual messages have to be instrumented to support this feature, to be instrumented
with an ID.
The list of IDs supported is in the "debug-messages.dox" file for that specific version;
[this is the current list in master](https://github.com/squid-cache/squid/blob/master/doc/debug-messages.dox).

Message IDs are guaranteed to not change to guarantee forward compatibility.

> 

Reviewer: I am strongly against (manually and poorly) duplicating cache_log_message documentation in this repository.

Author: removing and rewording

## Internals

To instrument a message, one needs to:
1. make a note of the value of variable `DebugMessageIdUpperBound` in file `src/debug/Messages.h`
1. increment it by 1

> 1. add a line corresponding to the message in `doc/debug-messages.dox`

Author: Yes. I didn't know about it. This is why I rote this PR in the first place

1. in the message to be instrumented, change the second argument from DBG_* macro to one of
  - `Critical(id)`
  - `Important(id)`

>   - `Dbg(id)`

Reviewer: There is no single-parameter Dbg() macro. The existing two-parameter Dbg() macro should not be used where one of the first two macros can be used instead. For PRs that change an existing debugs() message, the correct macro choice is deterministic, and developer documentation, if any, should note that.

  - where the id is the one noted in the first step

> 1. in the file containing that message, it might be necessary to `#include "debug/Messages.h"`

Reviewer: We should be more specific to be more helpful and to reduce the number of change requests during review:

```suggestion
1. If the modified source file does not already include it, `#include "debug/Messages.h"`
```

> 1. try a full build

Reviewer: Developers should not try a "full build" (whatever that means). They should test that their changes are actually working, at least in their environment! The latter requires some form of a build, of course, but all of those generic requirements should be obvious and should not be documented in every for-developer note like this one. If we want to be explicit, referring to the existing PR preparation checklist may be sufficient.

If you keep the "try a full build" instructions, give a specific command, at least as an example. AFAICT, running `rm src/squid; make` should be sufficient in this case. Well, to be more precise, `make` alone should be sufficient, but I am not sure we have fixed all the dependency tracking problems that did require a `rm src/squid` step in some (fairly typical) cases.

> 1. submit a PR to the Squid project to share the fruit of the labour :)

Reviewer: Please add a link to the PR submission instructions.

> 

Reviewer: We should give an example. After https://github.com/squid-cache/squid/pull/1481 is merged, we can say something like "For an example, see commit ... but use the src/debug/Messages.h macro that matches the debugs() message you are instrumenting".
